---
date: "2018-06-25"
title: "June 25, 2018 Status Update"
---

## Accomplishments
Worked 3 full-time days on the game, a lot got done.

- Made new simpler scene switching and management

## Visual Rooms and Props
Gone are the days of a list of things to interact with. Rooms are now visual, with backgrounds, scrolling, and clicking on images of props. This puts it closer to [Escoria](https://github.com/godotengine/escoria) and a traditional point and click adventure game.

- Made rooms and props visual
- Redid the JSON syntax for commands to be easier to read and write

## Battle System Updates
Complete rewrite of the battle system to remove spaghetti code. Also worked on game design changes to the battle system.

- Reimplemented status effects with less spaghetti code
- Instead of having `Unit.has_effect()` checks littered through code, there's now a status effect service. Different code points contact this service, which determines if a certain effect should apply
- Example, on the end of a unit's turn, run the status effect service's `_on_turn_end(Unit)` event. The event checks if the unit has burning and applies the damage

### Weaknesses, Breaks
The interrupt system is no more, replaced with a break system.

- Units have weaknesses, hit them enough time with their weakness and they break. Broken enemies are more susceptible to damage and status effects
- Interrupt bar is now a break bar, inflict enough weaknesses and then the entire enemy team will be broken at once. They can do the same to you though, watch out

Why remove the interrupt system? Playtesting revealed the system as-is was too hard for players to understand. I had to explain during every battle, "Look at your interrupt bar, the enemy will interrupt this attack. Use a weak skill to cover the interrupt."

### Virtual Pet Participation
The player's virtual pet now participates in battle! They'll generate quests, fulfill them to queue a skill for the pet to use. There's risk and reward of "Do I fulfill the quest by using a skill I didn't originally plan to use, or should I stick with my planned move this turn?"

- Party's pet generates quests during battle
- Quests task the player with using certain types of skills
- Fulfilling the quest queues up a skill for the pet to use next round

## Games Played

Had some fun playing [Universal Paperclip](http://www.decisionproblem.com/paperclips/), a clicker game that starts you off making paperclips and then takes the "Universal" part of the name seriously.
