---
date: "2018-07-02"
title: "July 2, 2018 Status Update"
---

## Accomplishments
Unified features so they better work together from a game design perspective.

## POIs
Interacting with props can reveal points of interest (POIs).

- The UI notifies the player how many POIs are in the room
- Enter AR mode, the screen changes color, and POIs appear
- Interact with a POI to learn more about the game world (details) or unlock difficult battles (scum scraps)
- The player never has to enter AR mode, but there's benefits to unlocking details and scum scraps.

## Details
Details are additional information about the setting and the story. If a player unlocks enough details they can get a different ending.

## Scum Scraps
Players can use scum scraps (called battle tickets in code) to trigger a hard battle. Winning enough scum scrap battles unlocks upgrade levels for the party and the virtual pet. This is the main method of progression for the player's characters. It's an optional system, meaning players can make the game harder by opting to not use scum scraps. Winning these battles also unlocks units in the bestiary.

## Bestiary
The bestiary is like a Pokédex, keeping track of units that the player unlocks. It gives them a fun extra thing to do. Clear all the scum scrap battles to unlock all of the units. Gotta unlock them all.

## Virtual Pet Updates
Reworked how the virtual pet side of the game works by tying it into the above features. The player can also upgrade the virtual pet's skills with the rest of the party.

## Story Changes
Planned changes to the story to narrow the focus and double down on the horror aspect. When planning the updates, brainstormed a quest system.
